If you have not already been granted access to the server, then please
see the :ref:`p_usage_access_applying` page before continuing!

Timeout while connecting to the cluster
========================================

You may experience timeout errors when you attempt to connect to Esrum:

On Linux:

.. image:: /usage/access/images/connecting_ssh_timeout.gif
   :class: gif

On Windows, using MobaXterm:

.. image:: /usage/access/images/connecting_mobaxterm_timeout.png
    :align: center

Firstly verify that you are correctly connected to the UCPH VPN. This is
required to connect to Esrum. See the :ref:`p_usage_connecting` page for
more information.

If you are still unable to connect to Esrum after verifying that you are
correctly connected to the UCPH network, then please try to visit either
our `Project Manager <https://cbmrcat.unicph.domain/projects/>`_ or our
`Cohort Catalog <https://cbmrcat.unicph.domain/>`_.

If you are able to visit either of the Project Manager or Cohort Catalog
pages, then you most likely do not have proper permissions to connect to
Esrum. Please :ref:`contact us <p_contact>` and we will provide further
guidance.

If you are unable to connect to the VPN or to either of the above pages
while connected to the VPN, then there may be other problems with your
account. We recommend that you either :ref:`contact us <p_contact>` for
assistance or, if you prefer, that you submit a ticket to the UCPH-IT
Serviceportal_, using the ``Research Applications Counseling and
Support`` / ``Forskningsapplikationer RÃ¥dgivning og support`` ticket
category.


File uploads using MobaXterm never start
========================================

Please make sure that your session is configured to use the ``SCP
(enhanced speed)`` browser type. See step 4 in the
:ref:`s_configure_mobaxterm` section.


UCPH network-folders in ``~/ucph`` are not available when using MobaXterm
=========================================================================

Please make sure that you have disabled use of ``GSSAPI Kerberos`` as
described in the :ref:`s_configure_mobaxterm` section.

.. _danish: https://kunet.ku.dk/medarbejderguide/Sider/It/Fjernadgang-vpn.aspx

.. _english: https://kunet.ku.dk/employee-guide/Pages/IT/Remote-access.aspx

.. _serviceportal: https://serviceportal.ku.dk/
